# Using Autovala

Autovala is designed as several Vala classes, so it can be embedded easily in other projects. My idea is to embed it as a Gedit plugin; but until then, you can use it from command line.

Before all, you need to install in your project folder the CMake modules for Vala. The repository contains a version modified to work with Valadoc, but you can always download the last oficial version from launchpad using bazaar:

        bzr checkout lp:~elementary-apps/+junk/cmake-modules

This will create a folder called *cmake-modules*. Inside it will be a folder called *cmake*. Copy the later to your project folder, overwriting the existing files (this will keep the files needed for Valadoc).

The first thing to do is to initializate the project. This is done by calling autovala in your desired project's folder with:

        autovala init PROJECT_NAME

This will create a *PROJECT_NAME.avprj* file, with the most basic info about your project (the format for this file will be explained later). It will also try to create the basic folders for a vala project, and will show a warning if they already exist. It will never delete a file, except the *CMakeLists* files, of course. The folder hierarchy is:

        .
        +src
           +vapis
        +install
        +doc
        +po
        +data
           +icons
           +pixmaps
           +interface
           +local

By default, Autovala will compile all the *.vala* source files located inside *src/* and its subfolders into a single binary called like the project's name. How to generate libraries or several binaries is explained in the [tricks section](tricks). Also, an autogenerated namespace called *Constants* will be added, with the following build constants inside:

        public const string DATADIR         Base folder where the binary has been installed (usually /usr/share or /usr/local/share)
		public const string PKGDATADIR      Folder with data needed by the program
		public const string GETTEXT_PACKAGE GetText Domain Name
		public const string RELEASE_NAME    Project name
		public const string VERSION         Binary version

**VAPIS** is where you can put your custom VAPI files, when you need some for compiling your project.

**INSTALL** is the folder where to build everything. More about it later.

As can be supposed, **DOC** has to contain the documentation, and **PO** will contain the files with translatable strings. These strings are extracted from the *.vala* files and the *.ui* ones (from glade).

**DATA** is where you must put things like D-Bus activation files, *.desktop* files, scripts, and so on. **ICONS** folder and subfolders should contain the icons (in png or svg format), and Autovala will automagically take into account its size to put them in the right place.

**INTERFACE** should contain the *.ui* files from Glade.

Finally, **LOCAL** is a place where to put everything you want to get copied "as-is" into

        usr/share/PROJECT_NAME/

When you are OK for the first compilation, just use Autovala to check the folders and automatically update the *.avprj* file with:

        autovala refresh

When using this command, Autovala will guess all the info about your project and put it in the *.avprj* file, so you can check and modify it if you want (more on that later). If everything is OK, just create the CMakeLists files from that data using:

        autovala cmake

Now you can go to the **install/** folder and type ' *cmake ..* ' to generate the makefiles for compile your project. You can also use *cmake .. -DBUILD_VALADOC=ON* to add Valadoc support; but if you are using Ubuntu 12.10, maybe you should try to compile Valadoc from scratch, because it seems to be a bug in the version shipped from Canonical (more on this in the [tricks section](tricks)).

Since it's very common to call those two commands, one after the other, you can just use:

        autovala update

which will, first, update your *.avprj* file, and if there are no errors, will regenerate the *CMakeLists* files, all in one command.

If you want to remove all the automatically added lines in the project file, leaving only the manually added ones, you can use:

        autovala clear

These commands can be called from any of the folders or subfolders of the project, because it will search for the first *.avprj* file located in the current folder or upstream.

You can also use the Gedit plugin. With it, an *Autovala* entry will be added to the menu, with the following options:

 * Open project file: this option will open the project file (*.avprj*) for the currently active source file.
 * Update project: is the same than *autovala update*
